on our planet we have two polar regions
the arctic whose name comes from the
greek arcticos
of the north and the antarctic from
antarcticos
opposite of the north but there is an
easier way to remember them
if you just remember what surrounds them
the arctic
situated in the northern hemisphere of
our planet is an ocean
entirely surrounded by land on the other
side
of the world the antarctic is a
continent entirely surrounded by ocean
so the arctic has polar bears but no
penguins and the antarctic has penguins
but no polar bears
let's talk about the arctic first the
arctic region consists of a vast
ice-covered ocean
surrounded by treeless permafrost the
area can be defined as the region
between the arctic circle and the north
pole
if you were to stand at the north pole
everywhere you looked in all directions
would be south but standing at the north
pole is difficult to do for very long
because it's in the middle of an ocean
covered by constantly shifting frozen
sea ice
if you were to fall into the water at
the north pole you'd fall into water
that's 13
980 feet deep above the water
average winter temperatures can be as
low as negative 40 degrees celsius
and the coldest recorded temperature is
approximately negative
68 degrees celsius despite these
incredibly harsh conditions
humans have populated areas in the
arctic for thousands of years
life in the arctic includes organisms
living in the ice
zooplankton and phytoplankton fish and
marine mammals
birds land animals plants and human
societies
okay what about antarctica antarctica
is earth's southernmost continent and it
contains the geographic south pole
it's the fifth largest continent on the
planet at nearly twice the size of
australia
almost 98 of antarctica is covered by
ice at least
one mile in thickness conditions in
antarctica are some of the most extreme
in the entire world
on average it's the coldest windiest
driest continent
and has the highest average elevation of
all the continents
you might think that it snows all the
time at the poles but antarctica is so
dry it's considered a desert
with annual precipitation of only 200
millimeters along the coast
and far less inland the temperature in
antarctica has reached negative 89
degrees celsius
because it's so harsh and hard to get to
there are no permanent human residents
on antarctica
but anywhere from a thousand to five
thousand people reside throughout the
year at the research station scattered
across the continent
even the most extreme animals fight for
survival and only cold adapted organisms
survive there
including many types of algae animals
bacteria
fungi plants and protista
but why is antarctica colder than its
northern cousin
well first much of the continent is more
than three kilometers above sea level
and temperature decreases with elevation
that's why mountaintops have snow on
them
second remember that the arctic is
really a frozen ocean
the water in the ocean beneath it is
warmer than the frozen ground in the
antarctic
and that warmth is transferred through
the ice pack
this prevents temperatures in the arctic
regions from reaching the extremes
typical of the land surface of
antarctica
third the seasons are conspiring against
the antarctic
during the aphelion in july when the
earth is the farthest away from the sun
it also happens to be winter in the
antarctic which creates a double whammy
of cold for the southern pole
but despite being inhospitable the north
and south pole are a big reason why our
planet is the way it is
both of our polar regions are very
important climate controllers
they help moderate the temperature in
our temperate zones
and give us stable weather as sea ice in
the arctic declines due to climate
change and global warming
weather around the globe becomes
increasingly more unstable
you